initial v24.1.1 edited notes (#18643)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/_includes/releases/v24.1/v24.1.1.md

## v24.1.1

Release Date: June 13, 2024

{% include releases/new-release-downloads-docker-image.md release=include.release %}

<h3 id="v24-1-1-{{-site.data.products.enterprise-}}-edition-changes">{{ site.data.products.enterprise }} edition changes</h3>

> - Fixed a bug that was present since v22.2 where [changefeeds]({% link v24.1/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) with long-running [initial scans]({% link v24.1/create-changefeed.md %}#initial-scan) might incorrectly restore checkpoint job progress and drop events during [changefeed restarts]({% link v24.1/changefeed-messages.md %}#duplicate-messages) due to transient errors or node restarts. The bug was most likely to occur in clusters with the following contributing factors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug introduced in v22.2 where a [changefeed]({% link v24.1/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) with a long-running [initial scan]({% link v24.1/create-changefeed.md %}#initial-scan) might incorrectly restore checkpoint job progress and drop events during a [changefeed restart]({% link v24.1/changefeed-messages.md %}#duplicate-messages) due to transient errors or node restarts. The bug was most likely to occur in clusters with the following contributing factors:
```

<h3 id="v24-1-1-sql-language-changes">SQL language changes</h3>

- The  [optimizer]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cost-based-optimizer.md %}) can now plan constrained scans over partial indexes in more cases, particularly on partial indexes with predicates referencing [virtual computed columns]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/computed-columns.md %}#virtual-computed-columns). [#123468][#123468]
- The storage parameter `ttl_delete_rate_limit`, which determines the rate limit for deleting expired rows, is now set to `100` by default. [#124354][#124354]
- CockroachDB no longer limits precision when converting [spatial data types]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/glossary#data-types.md %}) to JSON. [#124536][#124536]
- The `optimizer_push_offset_into_index_join` [session setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/session-variables.md %}) has been added. When enabled, the  [optimizer]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cost-based-optimizer.md %}) will attempt to push offset expressions into index join expressions to produce more efficient query plans. The setting is enabled by default on v24.1 and later, and disabled on v23.2. [#124490][#124490]

> - The default value of the `sql.defaults.results_buffer.size` [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}) has been changed from 16KiB to 512KiB. This reduces the chance that clients using [`READ COMMITTED`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/read-committed.md %}) transactions will hit errors that cannot automatically be retried within CockroachDB. [#124633][#124633]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The default value of the `sql.defaults.results_buffer.size` [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}) has been changed from 16KiB to 512KiB. This reduces the chance that clients using [`READ COMMITTED`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/read-committed.md %}) transactions will encounter errors that cannot automatically be retried within CockroachDB. [#124633][#124633]
```
Is "within CockroachDB" redundant?

Author: Hmm IMO it clarifies that the automatic retries are meant to be performed by the DB rather than by the client.

<h3 id="v24-1-1-operational-changes">Operational changes</h3>

> - The default limit for in-memory statement and transaction fingerprints has been lowered from 100,000 to 5000. This affects the [cluster settings]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}) `sql.metrics.max_mem_stmt_fingerprints` and `sql.metrics.max_mem_txn_fingerprints`. [#123430][#123430]

Reviewer: "...affects the cluster settings" does this just mean that if those are not set, they each default to 5000 now? Is the intent that if you know that 5000 is not enough, you should explicitly set it before upgrading?

Author: Thank you for the question! I clarified the wording. Also, it seems the intent was to lower the mem limits to a value that enables the flush operation to complete in time, so I don't think more guidance is necessary on this.

> - Added the `sql.pgwire.pipeline.count` [metric]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/metrics.md %}), which is a gauge that measures how many wire protocol commands have been received by the server, but have not yet begun processing. This metric will only grow if clients are using the "pipeline mode" of the PostgreSQL wire protocol. [#124256][#124256]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The new `sql.pgwire.pipeline.count` [gauge metric]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/metrics.md %}) shows the number of wire protocol commands that have been received by the server, but have not yet begun processing. This metric will only grow if clients are using the "pipeline mode" of the PostgreSQL wire protocol. [#124256][#124256]
```
Is it worth giving a link for "pipeline mode"?

> - The `client_authentication_ok` and `client_session_end` messages are now logged to the `SESSIONS` [log channel]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/logging-overview.md %}#logging-channels) unconditionally. Previously, these would only be logged if the `server.auth_log.sql_sessions.enabled` [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}) was set to `true`. All other `SESSIONS` log messages are still only logged if `server.auth_log.sql_sessions.enabled` or `server.auth_log.sql_connections.enabled` are set to `true`. If you do not want to see `client_authentication_ok` or `client_session_end` messages, then the `SESSIONS` log channel can be disabled entirely. [#124369][#124369]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `client_authentication_ok` and `client_session_end` messages are now logged to the `SESSIONS` [log channel]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/logging-overview.md %}#logging-channels) unconditionally. Previously, these would be logged only if the `server.auth_log.sql_sessions.enabled` [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}) was set to `true`. All other `SESSIONS` log messages are logged only if `server.auth_log.sql_sessions.enabled` or `server.auth_log.sql_connections.enabled` are set to `true`. To prevent logging of `client_authentication_ok` or `client_session_end` messages, you can optionally disable the `SESSIONS` log channel. [#124369][#124369]
```

<h3 id="v24-1-1-db-console-changes">DB Console changes</h3>

> - Previously, the [replication lag metric]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/physical-cluster-replication-monitoring.md %}) would falsely report high lag for multi-node clusters and on cutover. This is now fixed. [#123585][#123585]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where the [replication lag metric]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/physical-cluster-replication-monitoring.md %}) would falsely report high lag for multi-node clusters and on cutover. [#123585][#123585]
```

> - [**SQL Activity**]({% link v23.2/ui-sql-dashboard.md %}) entries sorted by `% of Runtime` are now correctly sorted by the runtime amount. [#123903][#123903]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug that caused [**SQL Activity**]({% link v23.2/ui-sql-dashboard.md %}) entries sorted by `% of Runtime` to be sorted incorrectly. [#123903][#123903]
```

> - Removed the "Admission Delay Rate", "Admission Work Rate", and "Requests Waiting For Flow Tokens" time-series charts from the DB Console. These charts often cause confusion and are not useful for general overload investigations. [#124509][#124509]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The "Admission Delay Rate", "Admission Work Rate", and "Requests Waiting For Flow Tokens" time-series charts have been removed from the DB Console. These charts can be difficult to interpret and provide little value for overload investigations. [#124509][#124509]
```

- The [**Overload** dashboard]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-overload-dashboard.md %}) now includes descriptions for all metrics. [#124509][#124509]

> - Reordered metrics on the [**Overload** dashboard]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-overload-dashboard.md %}) to improve their categorization. The metrics are now roughly in the following order: 1. Metrics to help determine which resource is constrained (IO, CPU); 2. Metrics to narrow down which [admission control]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/admission-control.md %}) queues are seeing requests waiting; 3. More advanced metrics about the system health (goroutine scheduler, L0 sublevels, etc.). [#124509][#124509]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Metrics on the [**Overload** dashboard]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-overload-dashboard.md %}) have been reordered to improve their categorization. The metrics are now roughly in the following order: 1. Metrics to help determine which resource is constrained (IO, CPU); 2. Metrics to narrow down which [admission control]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/admission-control.md %}) queues are seeing requests waiting; 3. More advanced metrics about system health (goroutine scheduler, L0 sublevels, etc.). [#124509][#124509]
```

> - Added the `cr.store.storage.l0-sublevels` and `cr.node.go.scheduler_latency-p99.9` metrics on the [**Overload** dashboard]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-overload-dashboard.md %}) for better visibility into overloaded resources. [#124509][#124509]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- New metrics `cr.store.storage.l0-sublevels` and `cr.node.go.scheduler_latency-p99.9` on the [**Overload** dashboard]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-overload-dashboard.md %}) provide better visibility into overloaded resources. [#124509][#124509]
```

- There are now four separate graphs for Admission Queue Delay: 1. Foreground (regular) CPU work; 2. Store (IO) work; 3. Background (elastic) CPU work; 4. Replication Admission Control (store overload on replicas). [#124509][#124509]

> - The `Admission Queueing Delay – Store` chart now separates elastic (background) work from the regular foreground work. [#124509][#124509]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
The previous note covers this.

> - The `Admission IO Tokens Exhausted` chart now separates elastic and regular IO work. [#124509][#124509]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
The previous note covers this.

<h3 id="v24-1-1-bug-fixes">Bug fixes</h3>

- Fixed a bug that would occur when [`ALTER TYPE ... DROP VALUE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-type.md %}) is followed by `DROP SCHEMA CASCADE ...` in the same transaction. Previously, the `ALTER TYPE` schema change would get queued up to run at commit time, but by that point, the type may have already been removed, so the commit could fail. [#123577][#123577]

> - CockroachDB now automatically repairs tables that see the error `invalid inbound foreign key ... origin table ID should be" or "invalid outbound foreign key ... reference table ID should be`. [#123668][#123668]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Tables are now automatically repaired when the errors `invalid inbound foreign key ... origin table ID should be ..." or "invalid outbound foreign key ... reference table ID should be ...` occur. [#123668][#123668]
```

> - Fixed a bug where a failed [`RESTORE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/restore.md %}) could leave the system in a state where re-attempting the restore was not possible without manual intervention. [#123205][#123205]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where a failed [`RESTORE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/restore.md %}) could not be retried without manual intervention. [#123205][#123205]
```

> - Fixed a bug that could cause calling a routine to return an unexpected `function ... does not exist` error. The bug is triggered when the routine is called twice using the exact same SQL query, and either: (a) the routine has polymorphic arguments, or: (b) in between the two calls, the routine is replaced by a routine with the same name and different parameters. This bug has existed since alpha versions of v23.1. [#123516][#123516]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug introduced in alpha versions of v23.1 where calling a routine could result in an unexpected `function ... does not exist` error. The bug is triggered when the routine is called twice using the exact same SQL query, and either: (a) the routine has polymorphic arguments, or: (b) between the two calls, the routine is replaced by a routine with the same name and different parameters. [#123516][#123516]
```

> - Fixed a rare bug where a lease transfer could lead to a `side-transport update saw closed timestamp regression` panic. The bug could occur when a node was overloaded and [failing to heartbeat its node liveness record]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-setup-troubleshooting.md %}#node-liveness-issues). [#123533][#123533]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a rare bug where a lease transfer could lead to a `side-transport update saw closed timestamp regression` panic. The bug could occur when a node was overloaded and [failing to heartbeat its node liveness record]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-setup-troubleshooting.md %}#node-liveness-issues). [#123533][#123533]
```
Would the panic occur because the previous node isn't reachable or the new node isn't reachable?

Author: I have no clue after re-reading the original PR, and am also not sure how much that question applies, so I'll avoid elaborating here.

- Fixed a crash introduced in v24.1.0-beta.2 that could occur when planning statistics collection on a table with a [virtual computed column]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/computed-columns.md %}#virtual-computed-columns) using a user-defined type when the newly-introduced [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}) `sql.stats.virtual_computed_columns.enabled` is set to `true`. (The setting was introduced in v24.1.0-alpha.1, and defaults to `true`.) [#124060][#124060]

> - Previously, [`ALTER TABLE ... ALTER PRIMARY KEY`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-table.md %}#alter-primary-key) could hang if the table had any indexes which were referred to by [views]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/views.md %}) or [functions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/functions-and-operators.md %}) using the force index syntax. This is now fixed. [#124323][#124323]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where an [`ALTER TABLE ... ALTER PRIMARY KEY`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-table.md %}#alter-primary-key) statement could hang if the table had any indexes which were referred to by [views]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/views.md %}) or [functions]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/functions-and-operators.md %}) using the `FORCE INDEX` clause. [#124323][#124323]
```

> - Fixed a bug where CockroachDB would ignore the `max_decimal_digits` argument of the `st_geojson` [builtin function]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/functions-and-operators.md %}#built-in-functions) and would use the default instead. The bug was only present in v24.1.0. [#124502][#124502]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug introduced in v24.1.0 where the `max_decimal_digits` argument of the `st_geojson` [builtin function]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/functions-and-operators.md %}#built-in-functions) was ignored and the default was used instead. [#124502][#124502]
```

> - Scattering a range with a replication factor of 1 now no longer erroneously up-replicates the range to two replicas. Leases will also no longer thrash between nodes when perturbed with a replication factor of 1. [#124453][#124453]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed bugs where scattering a range with a replication factor of 1 could erroneously up-replicate the range to two replicas, and where a lease could thrash between nodes when perturbed with a replication factor of 1. [#124453][#124453]
```
I'm not really sure what the last sentence means, so maybe this is an incorrect edit.

> - Previously, if the `ttl_row_stats_poll_interval` storage parameter was non-zero for a table with [row-level TTL]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/row-level-ttl.md %}) enabled, the queries issued to update row stats could block the job from completing. Now, if the job completes, these stats queries are cancelled instead. This means that the `jobs.row_level_ttl.total_rows` and `jobs.row_level_ttl.total_expired_rows` metrics will report `0` if the job finishes before the row stats queries complete. [#124627][#124627]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where, if the `ttl_row_stats_poll_interval` storage parameter was non-zero for a table with [row-level TTL]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/row-level-ttl.md %}) enabled, the queries issued to update row statistics could block the job from completing. Now, if the job completes, these statistics queries are cancelled. This means that the `jobs.row_level_ttl.total_rows` and `jobs.row_level_ttl.total_expired_rows` metrics will report `0` if the job finishes before the row stats queries complete. [#124627][#124627]
```

> - Fixed a bug where [`DROP ROLE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/drop-role.md %})/[`DROP USER`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/drop-user.md %}) could leave references behind inside types, which could prevent [`SHOW GRANTS`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/show-grants.md %}) from working. [#124619][#124619]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where a [`DROP ROLE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/drop-role.md %}) or [`DROP USER`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/drop-user.md %}) command could leave references behind inside types, which could prevent subsequent [`SHOW GRANTS`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/show-grants.md %}) commands from working. [#124619][#124619]
```

> - Previously, the `results_buffer_size` [session variable]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/session-variables.md %}) could not be configured by using the "options" query parameter in the connection string; it could only be configured as a top-level query parameter. Now, `results_buffer_size` can be configured in either part of the connection string. (This variable still cannot be changed with the [`SET`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/set-vars.md %}) command after the session begins.) [#124775][#124775]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where the `results_buffer_size` [session variable]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/session-variables.md %}) could not be configured by using the "options" query parameter in the connection string, but only as a top-level query parameter. Now, `results_buffer_size` can be configured in either part of the connection string. This variable still cannot be changed with the [`SET`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/set-vars.md %}) command after the session begins. [#124775][#124775]
```

> - Fixed a bug where a change to a user-defined type could cause queries against tables using that type to fail with an error message like: `histogram.go:694: span must be fully contained in the bucket`. The change to the user-defined type could come directly from an [`ALTER TYPE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-type.md %}) statement, or indirectly from an [`ALTER DATABASE ... ADD REGION`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-database.md %}#add-region) or [`DROP REGION`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-database.md %}#drop-region) statement (which implicitly change the `crdb_internal_region` type). This bug had existed since user-defined types were introduced in v20.2. [#124856][#124856]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug introduced in v20.2 where a change to a user-defined type could cause queries against tables using that type to fail with the error message `histogram.go:694: span must be fully contained in the bucket`. The change to the user-defined type could come directly from an [`ALTER TYPE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-type.md %}) statement, or indirectly from an [`ALTER DATABASE ... ADD REGION`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-database.md %}#add-region) or [`DROP REGION`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/alter-database.md %}#drop-region) statement (which implicitly change the `crdb_internal_region` type).  [#124856][#124856]
```

<h3 id="v24-1-1-performance-improvements">Performance improvements</h3>

- Improved the efficiency of error handling in the [vectorized execution engine]({% link v24.1/vectorized-execution.md %}) in order to reduce the CPU overhead of statement timeout handling and reduce the potential for more statement timeouts. [#123499][#123499]

> - Disabled a [changefeed]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/change-data-capture.md %}) optimization on reducing duplicates during aggregator restarts due to its bad performance. [#125021][#125021]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Due to its poor performance, a [changefeed]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/change-data-capture.md %}) optimization that aimed to reduce duplicates during aggregator restarts due to its bad performance has been disabled. [#125021][#125021]
```

[#124060]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124060
[#124085]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124085
[#124256]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124256
[#124304]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124304
[#124323]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124323
[#124354]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124354
[#124369]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124369
[#124453]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124453
[#124490]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124490
[#124502]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124502
[#124509]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124509
[#124536]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124536
[#124619]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124619
[#124627]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124627
[#124633]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124633
[#124775]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124775
[#124856]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/124856
[0f67079b6]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/commit/0f67079b6

> [eab42ef7a]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/commit/eab42ef7a

Reviewer: Are these stray?
